under a wide range of operating
conditions most important part of
Francis turbine is its runner it is
fitted with a collection of complex
shaped blades
in runner water is entered radially and
leaves axially during the course of flow
water glides over runner blades
Francis turbine blades are specially
shaped you can note that blades are
having thin airfoil cross-section so
when water flows over it a low pressure
will be produced on one side and high
pressure on the other side this will
result in a lift force you can also note
one more peculiar thing about the blade
it is having a bucket kind of shape
towards the outlet so water will hit and
produce an impulse force before leaving
the runner both impulse force and lift
force will make the runner rotate so
Francis turbine is not a pure reaction
turbine a portion of force comes from
impulse action also thus as water flows
over runner blades both its kinetic and
pressure energy will come down since
flow is entering radially and leaves
axially they are also called mixed flow
turbine runner is connected to generator
via a shaft for electricity production
this arrangement is fitted inside a
spiral casing
flow is entered via an inlet nozzle
slow rate of water will get reduced
along length of casing since water is
drawn into the runner but decreasing
area of spiral casing will make sure
that flow is entered to run a region
almost at a uniform velocity stay vanes
and guide vanes are fitted at entrance
of runner the basic purpose of them is
to convert one part of pressure energy
to kinetic energy flow which is coming
from the casing meets stay vanes they
are fixed stay vanes steers the flow
towards the runner section
thus it reduces swirl of Inlet flow
demand for power may vary over time the
guide vein mechanism is used to control
water flow rate and make sure that power
production is synchronized with power
demand apart from controlling flow rate
guide veins also control flow angle to
inlet portion of runner blade
thus guide vanes make sure that Inlet
flow angle is that optimum angle of
attack for maximum power extraction from
fluid low pressure at exits side of
turbine may cause serious problems of
cavitation so a carefully designed draft
tube is fitted at exits side to
discharge the fluid out draft tube will
transform velocity head to static head
due to its increasing area